David Schaich (he): ...hit the
David Schaich (he): recording button.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): welcome to statistical physics,
David Schaich (he):  Math327.
David Schaich (he): This is
David Schaich (he): a fun topic that I'm giving now for the second time in person, which means I should introduce myself as
David Schaich (he): David Schaich, lecture in theoretical physics here.
David Schaich (he): and that
David Schaich (he): a lot of my research deals with applications of statistical physics, some of which we
David Schaich (he): seen it maybe before getting on From that I should ask it.
David Schaich (he): All of you already know each other from
David Schaich (he): previous modules.
David Schaich (he): some nods, some shaking the Ted. Well, I don't know any of you, so maybe we'll just go briefly around the room. You can. Probably
David Schaich (he): my name is Louis and I'm from China.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): Nice to meet all of you, and there will be more coming to some of these classes, probably the ones in the afternoon, but for now
David Schaich (he): we can
David Schaich (he): under way with the very first day.
David Schaich (he): where
David Schaich (he): it takes a motivation from an old saying
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): the journey of a 1,000 miles
David Schaich (he): begins with asking, is it worth it?
David Schaich (he): So, in order to motivate
David Schaich (he): the long journey, will be taken with statistical physics
David Schaich (he): in this term.
David Schaich (he): Just
David Schaich (he): review the
David Schaich (he): big picture we
David Schaich (he): central concept and some of the core results we're going after. And also say that as this is
David Schaich (he): the second time i'm teaching this, I'm. Bringing in feedback from last year's
David Schaich (he): class, and going to try to see how well I can write meeting over
David Schaich (he): this projector rather than up in shock on the blackboard largely for the sake of having a nice
David Schaich (he): screen capture to record and put online for leave a reference
David Schaich (he): I will check in and be 3 to see how well that is going, but that already is a bit of the
David Schaich (he): boarding logistical details
David Schaich (he): that we do. We need to touch on
David Schaich (he): on the first Monday of term
David Schaich (he): as usual.
David Schaich (he): and then once they.
David Schaich (he): I went into
David Schaich (he): the content of the outline
David Schaich (he): of the module, starting with
David Schaich (he): some foundations for
David Schaich (he): probability.
David Schaich (he): So that's the
David Schaich (he): plan for today, and I almost forgot.
David Schaich (he): I have a 6 digit attendance monitoring code.
David Schaich (he): So let's put that up here
David Schaich (he): 5,
David Schaich (he): 6, 8, 7,
David Schaich (he): 1 1.
Put that on the board as well.
David Schaich (he): Okay.
David Schaich (he): I'm gonna
David Schaich (he): that. We're going on
David Schaich (he): all of the tasks that
David Schaich (he): like that just need to be done
David Schaich (he): from day to day. So
David Schaich (he): right into my
David Schaich (he): that big picture for
David Schaich (he): statistical physics.
David Schaich (he): So just summarizing
David Schaich (he): what sorts of things we'll be learning about in this module.
David Schaich (he): and why
David Schaich (he): I want to
David Schaich (he): emphasize the point that
David Schaich (he): statistical physics is
David Schaich (he): really one of the pillars of modern physics, by which I mean sort of everything that's happened in the past
David Schaich (he): 100 5,200 years. In physics it goes along with
David Schaich (he): quantum
David Schaich (he): physics and also relativity.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): 3
David Schaich (he): basic concepts that underly
David Schaich (he): essentially all of the
David Schaich (he): applications and
David Schaich (he): and work that's been done in
David Schaich (he): modern physics.
David Schaich (he): in our lifetimes and before.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the way in which, or what statistical physics brings into this mixture.
David Schaich (he): for modern physics is
David Schaich (he): the focus on
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): behavior, all of many
David Schaich (he): independent degrees of freedom.
David Schaich (he): The size of this
David Schaich (he): it's dealing with large numbers.
David Schaich (he): No call particles here
David Schaich (he): can be objects that necessarily need to be
David Schaich (he): atoms or elementary particles
David Schaich (he): any fundamental sort, but just a large collection of
David Schaich (he): objects that are all
David Schaich (he): interacting and behaving according to
David Schaich (he): mechanics. Quantum mechanics for classical mechanics, relativistically not relativistic.
David Schaich (he): But once we have
David Schaich (he): a large number.
David Schaich (he): statistical physics give us a tool to handle
David Schaich (he): or to analyze the behavior of large numbers of particles, and see the
David Schaich (he): properties or the phenomena that emerge from that behavior.
David Schaich (he): And before going into
David Schaich (he): what some of those emerging phenomena are.
David Schaich (he): Maybe it's
David Schaich (he): useful to just emphasize what sort of large numbers we're going to have in mind if we think of.
David Schaich (he): hey?
David Schaich (he): So a single
David Schaich (he): of water
David Schaich (he): that has
David Schaich (he): roughly 10 to the power.
David Schaich (he): 22,
David Schaich (he): all the tools of H. 20.
David Schaich (he): So I got those number divided by the atomic weight of water. It's about
David Schaich (he): 6 times 10 to the 23 over 18 is 10 to the 22 min round numbers, with numbers. This large. We don't need to care
David Schaich (he): too much about
David Schaich (he): any significant figures beyond that number and the exponents.
David Schaich (he): And if we want to say, take our
David Schaich (he): mechanics
David Schaich (he): knowledge, and use it to describe it
David Schaich (he): that many particles directly. Then we're talking about
David Schaich (he): roughly.
David Schaich (he): and the power 22
David Schaich (he): couple of
David Schaich (he): hey
David Schaich (he): position.
David Schaich (he): velocity
David Schaich (he): for each of those
David Schaich (he): h 2 or molecules. You might also care about this orientation.
David Schaich (he): We have a city
David Schaich (he): 3 times
David Schaich (he): position and velocity for each one describing a position in three-dimensional space and velocity in all 3 directions.
David Schaich (he): And if we even imagine running down
David Schaich (he): an initial state
David Schaich (he): for these
David Schaich (he): and the 22 molecules that form just the cubic centimeter of water.
David Schaich (he): So we give each of these positions and velocities a 32 bit number
David Schaich (he): in some computer storage. So that's 4 Byte.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): and I think that 3 times 4 times 10 to 22
David Schaich (he): don't care about
David Schaich (he): the number upfront what we have 10 to 23
David Schaich (he): bytes
David Schaich (he): of information.
David Schaich (he): just to write down the initial State
David Schaich (he): even before
David Schaich (he): solving the
David Schaich (he): 10 to the 22 couple of equations that
David Schaich (he): describe how we all in time
David Schaich (he): and by the 5
David Schaich (he): familiar
David Schaich (he): you this that's
David Schaich (he): a 100 million
David Schaich (he): terabytes of data just to write down the initial state of the system.
David Schaich (he): So it looks as though
David Schaich (he): analyzing even a small cubic centimeter. So it's a centimeter of water.
David Schaich (he): using the
David Schaich (he): traditional mechanics, tools and techniques that you've seen, and
David Schaich (he): other physics modules is a hopeless proposition just from the start. This is where statistical physics comes in.
David Schaich (he): They'll give us ways to
David Schaich (he): look at the large scale behavior of collections, of large numbers of
David Schaich (he): degrees of freedom, large numbers of particles, and get predictions out of those that
David Schaich (he): even though they won't, be exactly solving all of these equations, they will model them based on
David Schaich (he): randomness or stochastic assumptions.
David Schaich (he): You will still get excellence agreements with
David Schaich (he): physical observations.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): maybe that
David Schaich (he): brings me back to you.
David Schaich (he): It's question that I had
David Schaich (he): up on the projector along with the attendance code
David Schaich (he): which was
David Schaich (he): thinking about
David Schaich (he): how
David Schaich (he): scientists decided that
David Schaich (he): Adams actually existed, which was
David Schaich (he): a development so only about a little over 100 years ago.
David Schaich (he): back in the 18 hundreds that were
David Schaich (he): endless debates about
David Schaich (he): whether Adams really exist in the world, or just a convenient tool to think of
David Schaich (he): things about the actual physical truth. Did any of you have
David Schaich (he): any considerations about
David Schaich (he): these questions.
David Schaich (he): not hearing any. What I will suggest is that there are
David Schaich (he): a few ways to
David Schaich (he): established the existence of something before it can be observed directly whether that is
David Schaich (he): an H. 2, a molecule of water, or
David Schaich (he): fundamental strings of the plan scale.
David Schaich (he): One of those is to show that physical analyses, based on the assumption that these objects exist
David Schaich (he): correctly reproduce observed behavior.
David Schaich (he): Another is to
David Schaich (he): show that
David Schaich (he): there's no other way to
Oh.
David Schaich (he): explaining these sorts of observable behavior.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): that is the
David Schaich (he): enterprise that's
David Schaich (he): taking a little step back into history. People initially working on statistical physics in the 18 hundreds like
Boltzmann
David Schaich (he): names will encounter throughout the Module. They demonstrated how concepts like
David Schaich (he): pressure and entropy and thermodynamics could be explained on the basis of
David Schaich (he): Adams. A large number of atoms
David Schaich (he): interacting with each other, and a real breakthrough came
David Schaich (he): in 1905 when a fellow named Albert Einstein might have heard of
David Schaich (he): use those ideas of statistical physics to
David Schaich (he): explain what was called brownie and motion, something that had been observed close to 100 years before, that in the 18 twenties.
David Schaich (he): So scientists look at
David Schaich (he): Greg is a pollen
David Schaich (he): loading in water, looked at them under a microscope, which in the 18 twenties
David Schaich (he): was enough to see individual pollen grains.
David Schaich (he): Microscopes even today can't release optically see
David Schaich (he): as of of water. So these were brains and pollen in.
David Schaich (he): as far as we could tell, a continuous fluid.
David Schaich (he): and people observed
David Schaich (he): among the ground that these grades of pollen were randomly moving around
David Schaich (he): in this fluid.
David Schaich (he): and the question of why and how that was happening.
David Schaich (he): Well, it took about 80 years to to be resolved.
David Schaich (he): Some of the first ideas for that maybe these grades of pollen were actually alive.
David Schaich (he): They were little animals that were swimming around in the water
David Schaich (he): that was ruled out.
David Schaich (he): and in 1905 is
David Schaich (he): part of his so-called miracle.
What she
David Schaich (he): also introduce Special relativity equals Mc squared
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): introduced on an initial
David Schaich (he): progress in quantum mechanics, explaining the the photoelectric effect.
David Schaich (he): Einstein published a third work.
assuming
David Schaich (he): the existence of Adams, analyzing them through statistical physics, and predicting precisely how far these cranes of pollen or other objects would move as
David Schaich (he): these water molecules bounced off of them in time.
David Schaich (he): That was something that
David Schaich (he): folks were unable to explain with
David Schaich (he): other ways of
David Schaich (he): modeling water as a continuous fluid, for instance, and in short order.
David Schaich (he): Within a couple of years they
David Schaich (he): had conducted experiments inspired by Einstein's calculations confirmed his predictions, and was newly awarded the 1926
David Schaich (he): Nobel prize.
David Schaich (he): or
David Schaich (he): demonstrating the what they call the discontinuous structure of matter. In other words, the existence of
David Schaich (he): based on
David Schaich (he): that statistical physics analysis.
David Schaich (he): Whether something similar will happen for a string theory, I guess, is
David Schaich (he): you have to be determined.
David Schaich (he): But
David Schaich (he): what's that
David Schaich (he): sort of gravity? Motion is something that
David Schaich (he): might not be familiar to a lot of it. Had any of you
David Schaich (he): heard of that before
David Schaich (he): coming in here today.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): a level
David Schaich (he): it. It is
David Schaich (he): a nice historical topic to to look at
something maybe more familiar in the everyday
which
David Schaich (he): i'll have to zoom out to
David Schaich (he): on to this projector is
David Schaich (he): what we can call with
David Schaich (he): some poetry the arrow of time.
David Schaich (he): the idea that
David Schaich (he): we can tell, looking at certain processes
David Schaich (he): which direction time is flowing. Which of these 4 snapshots of a beaker of water. It comes before or after the others.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): in that
David Schaich (he): this
David Schaich (he): low budget animation a drop with purple dye is being dropped into a beaker of water.
David Schaich (he): and as it comes in it diffuses, spreads out. It eventually fills that whole beaker.
David Schaich (he): and we intuitively know that
David Schaich (he): time is
David Schaich (he): going from
David Schaich (he): left to right
David Schaich (he): in these 4 frames.
David Schaich (he): The arrow is pointing in
David Schaich (he): that direction, even though
David Schaich (he): do you
David Schaich (he): underlying processes? If you look at the individual atoms of dye and water, how they're bouncing off
David Schaich (he): dying water, how they're bouncing off each other!
David Schaich (he): All of those interactions are symmetric under the reversible time.
David Schaich (he): 2 molecules come in and dance off each other.
David Schaich (he): It's entirely possible for the switch. Directions come back in and out the other way
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): totally
David Schaich (he): it is
David Schaich (he): entirely possible for, say.
David Schaich (he): a spread out to bounce off
David Schaich (he): the tend to be 24 or so water molecules in here in such a way that, as time goes on
David Schaich (he): spontaneously close to a smaller drop.
David Schaich (he): and eventually
David Schaich (he): could even be injected if the
David Schaich (he): enough of these water molecules
David Schaich (he): along with it in the proper way.
David Schaich (he): But we know that would be crazy.
David Schaich (he): And given
David Schaich (he): this this picture, we can tell what way time is flowing. If we were to be given
David Schaich (he): the sequence of this animation
David Schaich (he): running in reverse, it would be obvious that it was going in reverse, just from
the
David Schaich (he): behavior of
David Schaich (he): the large scale diffusion coming from the underlying dynamics of
these
David Schaich (he): hundreds of billions of dollars.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): that is.
David Schaich (he): we talked about that
David Schaich (he): some of the
David Schaich (he): historical
David Schaich (he): uses of statistical physics to demonstrate that at least
David Schaich (he): and explain.
David Schaich (he): I will explain that. Just tell me now this is
David Schaich (he): a target and a possibility for what we're going to do, how this area of time arises, and how we can understand it scientifically.
David Schaich (he): But statistical physics is not just
David Schaich (he): domain of a 100 years ago
David Schaich (he): that you.
David Schaich (he): Nobel Prize in physics from not this past autumn, but 2021
David Schaich (he): was given to these 3 folks.
David Schaich (he): I can practice mispronouncing names.
David Schaich (he): secure
David Schaich (he): or
David Schaich (he): modern day applications of statistical physics
David Schaich (he): and hustleman our climate scientists.
David Schaich (he): and we can imagine that looking at
David Schaich (he): the client, that's all with you.
David Schaich (he): Adams, out there, how they're all interacting in many different forms to drive
David Schaich (he): weather and warming currents, and
David Schaich (he): everything else
David Schaich (he): going on in the environment
David Schaich (he): lies on statistical physics techniques to handle such a large number of particles interacting in such a large number of ways.
David Schaich (he): no, at least the
David Schaich (he): effects of particles being introduced into the system by human activity.
Georgia or Easy.
David Schaich (he): His work is even more directly related to statistical physics. If you
David Schaich (he): look it up, that's the domain it will be under
David Schaich (he): here
David Schaich (he): introduced and analyzed.
David Schaich (he): So the theoretical concepts and systems known as spin glasses.
David Schaich (he): something that we may well have a chance at least to look at.
And
David Schaich (he): the later stages of this course.
David Schaich (he): systems of spins, little magnets that interact with each other in a disordered way that have
David Schaich (he): unique and
David Schaich (he): predictable phenomena that we're able to find applications.
David Schaich (he): I say, in the nobel
David Schaich (he): citation applications from atomic scales to planetary scales.
David Schaich (he): all based on the interactions of these large numbers of particles.
David Schaich (he): So we might see the spin glasses. I'm permitting we're not going to
David Schaich (he): do Nobel, where they work, analyzing them.
David Schaich (he): Some things that we are going to be able to do.
David Schaich (he): I say, look at the
David Schaich (he): keep capacity
David Schaich (he): of various materials?
Or
David Schaich (he): is the heat capacity of a material in general, we will
David Schaich (he): first of all just call me
David Schaich (he): what a heat capacity is
David Schaich (he): related to
David Schaich (he): how much energy
David Schaich (he): is involved in
David Schaich (he): a unit of temperature
David Schaich (he): in a specific way that will be made precise.
David Schaich (he): And the
David Schaich (he): points on this plot our measurements of this heat capacity for a few different materials led aluminium and diamond.
David Schaich (he): As a function of the temperature. Roughly, room temperature is 300 kelvin
David Schaich (he): plus, or minus 100 in other direction.
David Schaich (he): and the lines on here are predictions for how this
David Schaich (he): measurable quantity in these levels should behave as
David Schaich (he): a function of temperature, and that is a prediction that you will be able to derive.
David Schaich (he): We will also be able to
David Schaich (he): zoom in on at low temperature region, and I think so
David Schaich (he): here for a few different materials.
David Schaich (he): copper, silver, and gold, or
David Schaich (he): we'll be able to derive
David Schaich (he): the precise form of the seed capacity
David Schaich (he): as
David Schaich (he): a linear piece, so
David Schaich (he): it's on the vertical axis. Now is the heat capacity divided by temperature
David Schaich (he): so multiply by temperature on either side that concept intercept
David Schaich (he): becomes
David Schaich (he): a linear piece
David Schaich (he): in the
David Schaich (he): independence of the E capacity plus a straight line
David Schaich (he): on the plot versus T squared gives the next correction of t cubed.
David Schaich (he): Here we can see we're looking at very low temperatures about
David Schaich (he): 3 or 4 degrees below, or sorry about absolute 0, well below 0. So on the cell some scale.
David Schaich (he): and we will
David Schaich (he): derive that low temperature behavior. Only see capacity which is
David Schaich (he): at a fundamental level coming from
David Schaich (he): the behavior of the electrons in these metals.
David Schaich (he): created as
David Schaich (he): a
David Schaich (he): it gets
David Schaich (he): all particles.
David Schaich (he): maybe the one last
David Schaich (he): forecast, if something we can look forward to is
David Schaich (he): this
David Schaich (he): so here, which is
David Schaich (he): now fitting on the screen.
David Schaich (he): which is
David Schaich (he): a measurement of what's called the power spectrum
David Schaich (he): of the
David Schaich (he): cosmic microwave background.
David Schaich (he): So you
David Schaich (he): lingering
David Schaich (he): radiation that remains following the the Big Bang of 13 points
David Schaich (he): 7 or so 1 billionyears ago.
David Schaich (he): The you
here. This power spectrum is
David Schaich (he): a powers. You can see this energy Times time divided by a volume.
David Schaich (he): So an energy density
David Schaich (he): Times time
David Schaich (he): plotted against the frequency. You know, units of hairs.
David Schaich (he): Don't need to worry about the precise details between we'll get to in due course.
David Schaich (he): Just to say that
David Schaich (he): this measurements of that
David Schaich (he): cosmic microwave background
David Schaich (he): power, that from the amount of power in the
David Schaich (he): radiation up in the frequency
David Schaich (he): was carried out by this Kobe mission. So that was a satellite in the 1990 S. The cosmic background explorer, and this plot
David Schaich (he): itself
one.
David Schaich (he): I should say it will work that went into it.
David Schaich (he): It's also recognized by a relatively recent Nobel prize, at least recent enough that all of us
David Schaich (he): hopefully we're alive at that point in 2,006.
David Schaich (he): So that is
David Schaich (he): hopefully demonstrating
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): why are they.
David Schaich (he): and also power of
David Schaich (he): statistical physics applications
David Schaich (he): With a little preview
David Schaich (he): of some of the things we will be going for.
David Schaich (he): So let me
David Schaich (he): turn to
David Schaich (he): topic some questions that may seem
David Schaich (he): abstract or later. Today, in the next few weeks we can keep in mind the source of targets we're going after.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): with all of that hopefully motivating this work
David Schaich (he): might as well
David Schaich (he): I don't know
David Schaich (he): not so much about what we'll learn, but
David Schaich (he): more about
David Schaich (he): how we're going to go about this.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): just take it
David Schaich (he): quick glance through
David Schaich (he): the logistics
David Schaich (he): and the canvas page for the module which
David Schaich (he): you hopefully have been able to reach. And hopefully, it looks like this.
David Schaich (he): We are now in room 106
David Schaich (he): at 9 am. On the Monday.
David Schaich (he): and in their wisdom the people who schedule
David Schaich (he): the meeting times have put us in in different rooms
David Schaich (he): on every day of the week, just to keep us on our toes. So
David Schaich (he): the lecture tomorrow afternoon we'll be next door in the bigger room. That currently has a bigger class right now
David Schaich (he): and then tutorials on Thursday mornings, upstairs in room to 10.
David Schaich (he): Please ask questions.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. The space should be accessible.
David Schaich (he): You should have gotten an announcement from me
David Schaich (he): last week a a link to it.
David Schaich (he): that link. So it's. Course
David Schaich (he): 6 0, 6, 0, one up at the top. If you have any trouble getting to it.
David Schaich (he): come and talk to me, and we'll sort that out.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): I will say
David Schaich (he): in terms of coming to talk to me office hours just to keep things simple are the hour after every class meeting, so Mondays and Thursdays at 11 Tuesdays at 5, and that will be
David Schaich (he): in my office, which is the theoretical physics wing. It's that wipes up
David Schaich (he): wing you can see over there facing the build of students.
David Schaich (he): Let me know if you don't know how to get there, because
David Schaich (he): it's a bit of an adventure you haven't been.
David Schaich (he): and I I will also
David Schaich (he): try to keep a Zoom Meeting running
David Schaich (he): during those office hours which i'm also using right now to record this. And we found that Zoom produces much better recordings than
David Schaich (he): the lecture capture software that the University has come up with on its own.
David Schaich (he): One other complication is that
David Schaich (he): starting next week and running
David Schaich (he): for the 3 weeks
David Schaich (he): and start that fill most of February.
David Schaich (he): the schedule will be slightly different. We will still be in here Monday mornings.
David Schaich (he): But then, on Tuesday afternoon at one.
David Schaich (he): you will have meetings in the
David Schaich (he): computer line up down the hall
David Schaich (he): on this more of the building.
David Schaich (he): and what those meetings are designed to do is give you an opportunity to work on
David Schaich (he): one of the 3 interim assignments for the module, which will be a computer project do
David Schaich (he): in
David Schaich (he): little over 3 weeks toward the end of February, and
David Schaich (he): it's not yet online. It should show up in a day or 2. I'm. Just checking to make sure that all of the
David Schaich (he): tasks that are assigned that project are actually feasible.
David Schaich (he): and probably on
David Schaich (he): this Thursday, and that first tutorial that can take a look at some of the
David Schaich (he): computing that we'll be doing for this. I will say that no background in computing is assumed or expected. And that's part of the reason we have those computer labs to give you
David Schaich (he): practice and an opportunity to
David Schaich (he): see what
David Schaich (he): learn what you need to
David Schaich (he): with me close to hand. If any issues come up.
David Schaich (he): it is something that you should be able to finish in those 6 h of computer lab.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): yeah.
David Schaich (he): there is no need to wait for the lab.
David Schaich (he): Those of you who
David Schaich (he): are already expert programmers may even find it might not even take you one of those 3 meetings.
David Schaich (he): But there's going to be a spread of acceptable
David Schaich (he): amounts of time that it will take.
David Schaich (he): based on
David Schaich (he): how much experience you have with programming, and how naturally it it comes to you. That's something that
David Schaich (he): varies based on everyone's, background and and past experience.
David Schaich (he): and there's a wide range of
David Schaich (he): acceptable amount of time it will take to to deal with that.
David Schaich (he): So hopefully.
David Schaich (he): those 3 computer labs and those 3 weeks leading to
David Schaich (he): that's
David Schaich (he): good line
David Schaich (he): will be plenty for everyone.
David Schaich (he): I will say that
David Schaich (he): I did request different deadlines, and then these.
David Schaich (he): But wasn't able to get them just based on
David Schaich (he): balancing things with all the other modules everyone else wanted. They have a class test in week. 7 say so. Our homework got kicked up 2 week, 5 just
David Schaich (he): do one week after the into that computer project. So
David Schaich (he): I will say, that's this twenty-first of February is that third and final day that we will meet in room 101
David Schaich (he): for the computer lab.
David Schaich (he): So, hopefully by that point the project will be nearly done for everyone, and it can get in by the end of the day.
David Schaich (he): Homework itself is then
David Schaich (he): do the following week. It will also be
David Schaich (he): released
David Schaich (he): soon that
David Schaich (he): okay, once I check that.
David Schaich (he): But here I have to check that. It's going to cover stuff that we'll get through it
David Schaich (he): by that time.
David Schaich (he): and then the second homework is not due until after the spring break.
David Schaich (he): March and April are going to be
David Schaich (he): sort of
David Schaich (he): relatively light
David Schaich (he): months for this module, at least in terms of
David Schaich (he): assessment. So each of these 3 projects
David Schaich (he): and see our 15% to the overall mark. The remaining 55 is
David Schaich (he): a 2 h.
David Schaich (he): a final exam which will be scheduled in the usual way
David Schaich (he): that's in person, as
David Schaich (he): I think we're back to that
David Schaich (he): pattern in general now.
David Schaich (he): So I head back to
David Schaich (he): the landing page for
David Schaich (he): the site, and see if there is anything else
David Schaich (he): with highlighting
David Schaich (he): it's on this page which you should be able to reach on your own.
David Schaich (he): Hi, man.
David Schaich (he): we'll say that the overall outline for the course that we can see both there and
David Schaich (he): in the the modules page, which is where the recordings and
David Schaich (he): written notes are going to be uploaded
David Schaich (he): and see that there are
David Schaich (he): 10 units to get through in the 12 weeks of the term. So it's not going to be a one unit per week type of thing. Some of these units are going to take longer than others. Some are going to be quicker.
David Schaich (he): and I can also say much like the computer programming. There is not a prerequisite to have seen anything about quantum mechanics. When we
David Schaich (he): go to.
David Schaich (he): I say these units on process statistics and quantum gases
David Schaich (he): that produce the heat capacity for metals, and those temperatures.
David Schaich (he): All of the quantumist
David Schaich (he): of what we'll be looking at is just going to be introduced as an here in this module.
David Schaich (he): and you don't need to worry if you haven't seen any of that before.
David Schaich (he): There is a python programming demo link here that
David Schaich (he): we'll look at
David Schaich (he): Thursday's tutorial or the
David Schaich (he): computer labs, and also some of the
David Schaich (he): lecture notes that, at least for me
David Schaich (he): plan for each of the lectures
David Schaich (he): we're going through.
David Schaich (he): along with some additional
David Schaich (he): logistical information and the usual statements about
David Schaich (he): academic integrity and
David Schaich (he): additional
David Schaich (he): resources.
David Schaich (he): Various textbooks that
David Schaich (he): can provide more information about
David Schaich (he): all of the
David Schaich (he): topics will be going over.
David Schaich (he): as well as
David Schaich (he): the advice that is probably familiar
David Schaich (he): at this point in your third year about ways to get the most out of the module.
David Schaich (he): even though
David Schaich (he): these modules are designed to be
David Schaich (he): predominantly self study it's still worthwhile to
David Schaich (he): come to class. It gives you a chance, if nothing else, to check in with the material and make sure it doesn't fall by the way side. You can ask any questions which is.
David Schaich (he): are the purpose of doing this at the University rather than just buying one of those textbooks and reading through it, and
David Schaich (he): it's worthwhile to
David Schaich (he): go through the lecture that was taking a quick look before class to see what's coming.
David Schaich (he): and then a more detailed look afterwards to make sure that
David Schaich (he): everything in there is
David Schaich (he): comfortable and familiar.
David Schaich (he): and in particular
David Schaich (he): i'll mention that
David Schaich (he): as we go through into the Content, these lecture notes are going to have gaps which are little exercises for you to fill. They will all be filled
David Schaich (he): in the lectures on the that, or skips explicitly.
but it's worth to
David Schaich (he): worthwhile to take a look and make sure you can fill out all of those along with. Of course.
David Schaich (he): working on the homework Problems computer project and the activities will be doing and the tutorial once we get to
David Schaich (he): that tutorial, and of course I encourage you to ask questions.
David Schaich (he): even if you think everyone else knows the answer to them. If you don't they're worth asking.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): yeah, you can ask me. You can ask each other. You can ask those additional resources.
David Schaich (he): One thing to note is that
David Schaich (he): while you're
David Schaich (he): welcome and encouraged to discuss
David Schaich (he): the homework and computer project and all the other material with each other. What you submit for assessment does need to be your own work. That
David Schaich (he): honestly represents your understanding
David Schaich (he): of
David Schaich (he): the material.
David Schaich (he): The one last thing i'll say about logistics
David Schaich (he): is that
David Schaich (he): there is a discussion more here where I just put into place
David Schaich (he): some placeholders for
David Schaich (he): questions, answers, and other discussions about
David Schaich (he): the various assessments
David Schaich (he): you that somebody
David Schaich (he): in the module as well as introductions.
David Schaich (he): if those of you who might be listening to this recording rather than being here in person, wants to introduce yourself
David Schaich (he): or those of you here want to
David Schaich (he): address the additional question
David Schaich (he): of
David Schaich (he): what
David Schaich (he): you might be interested to learn about through this module.
David Schaich (he): That Discussion Board is available for you.
David Schaich (he): 24 7 to
David Schaich (he): ask questions or answer These I've got ahead of. Introduce myself there, probably in more detail than we need
David Schaich (he): that that should
David Schaich (he): get us
David Schaich (he): back to the point where we're ready to get under way
David Schaich (he): with the material. Are there
David Schaich (he): questions before we do so about
David Schaich (he): big picture motivation, or those logistical details
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): we skim through on the canvas site.
David Schaich (he): I should say further questions, because a couple of good ones came up along the way.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): I will.
David Schaich (he): without further ado.
David Schaich (he): dive right into
David Schaich (he): material that we have
David Schaich (he): starting off with
David Schaich (he): some foundations
David Schaich (he): more probability.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): in the big picture we talked about some of large scale
David Schaich (he): that will arise from
David Schaich (he): analyzing systems of large numbers of particles
David Schaich (he): based on stochastic apply probability and randomness.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): 2 of the key results of probability theory that lead to the emergence of
David Schaich (he): smooth, continuous looking, large scale and macroscopic behavior
David Schaich (he): from the somewhat chaotic and random.
David Schaich (he): Apparently random dynamics of underlying
David Schaich (he): degrees of free one, are known as the
David Schaich (he): one of our numbers
David Schaich (he): in the central limits.
David Schaich (he): 0
David Schaich (he): and I'm. Assuming that you will have seen
David Schaich (he): both of these before, possibly more than once.
David Schaich (he): and we'll go through, not fully, rigorously, and not very carefully, and review
David Schaich (he): how these
David Schaich (he): probability 3 results arise
David Schaich (he): and sort of cast names in
David Schaich (he): the the way that we're going to be using them.
David Schaich (he): or more detailed applications to things like
David Schaich (he): classical quantum gases
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): other statistical systems.
David Schaich (he): So to begin with some
David Schaich (he): definitions.
David Schaich (he): what's going to be underlying?
David Schaich (he): Essentially everything we think about in this module is a concept of
David Schaich (he): a random experiment you can call E,
which
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): essentially doing something in the world, or observing something that is happening in the world.
David Schaich (he): and upon carrying out this action or experiments.
David Schaich (he): and observing
David Schaich (he): how the the world
all right.
David Schaich (he): reacts what stated ends up in, while we
David Schaich (he): observe the world to be
David Schaich (he): in some particular state
David Schaich (he): in Omega.
which
David Schaich (he): looks like the at the lower case.
David Schaich (he): Latin letter W.
David Schaich (he): And can we just use by that well enough. The particular symbols being used are so important. But if we
okay.
David Schaich (he): think about, just zoom.
David Schaich (he): go along with the simplest possible example, as we define these abstract concepts and experiment could be flipping a coin.
David Schaich (he): And then the States
David Schaich (he): let me get out of that.
David Schaich (he): We'll have information.
David Schaich (he): for instance about whether that
David Schaich (he): coin lands, heads, or tails, but it also has
David Schaich (he): by possibly additional information about the state of the world.
David Schaich (he): After
David Schaich (he): that, experiments, so, for instance.
David Schaich (he): grew up in the air as it was being flipped. How many times it rotated! We're exactly at landed, but desk we're on the floor, and what a direction it was pointing. I meant to bring a coin to carry out that experiment, but I didn't so it will have to remain just a thought experiments.
David Schaich (he): For now.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): given some experiments that can produce
David Schaich (he): as many as possible states.
David Schaich (he): we can define
David Schaich (he): over all, sets the capital Omega
David Schaich (he): to be
David Schaich (he): the set of all possible states.
David Schaich (he): Matt.
David Schaich (he): This experiments
David Schaich (he): e.
David Schaich (he): And we produce.
David Schaich (he): So this is all the possible ways that a coin can be flipped. For instance.
David Schaich (he): so very large sets
David Schaich (he): of
David Schaich (he): states, each of which can contain a very large amount of detail, most of which we are not going to care about for the purposes of statistical physics
David Schaich (he): with flipping a coin.
David Schaich (he): Usually, even when we say we flip the calling it's implicit that we only care doesn't land heads up or tails up. We don't care how long it was in the air where exactly it landed, or
David Schaich (he): how old the coin itself was.
David Schaich (he): So there is some interesting information in the state of the world that we want to extract, and some irrelevant information that we want to sweep aside in order to be able to analyze
David Schaich (he): resources, experiments mathematically.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the way that
David Schaich (he): we extract the mathematical information
David Schaich (he): it's like throwing out a measurements
David Schaich (he): we'll call it Capital X. That
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): a map taking in the overall state of the world
David Schaich (he): and extracting
David Schaich (he): just
David Schaich (he): do you
David Schaich (he): information of interest.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): in that point example.
David Schaich (he): yeah.
David Schaich (he): land heads up, or did it land heels up.
David Schaich (he): And if we
David Schaich (he): then repeat
David Schaich (he): that experiments
David Schaich (he): many times.
David Schaich (he): because it's a an experiment that evolves some elements of randomness.
David Schaich (he): whether this is random in principle, coming from quantum mechanics or random in practice.
David Schaich (he): coming from the idea that even though we could, if we flip a coin.
David Schaich (he): carry out the computations of
David Schaich (he): end of the 22 interactions with air molecules that determine
David Schaich (he): precisely what
David Schaich (he): how it's going to land where and when we can't do that in practice
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): the shorthand a way of simplifying
David Schaich (he): the description of the experiments.
David Schaich (he): Each time we repeat
David Schaich (he): the experiments
David Schaich (he): and carry out this measurements we will get a
David Schaich (he): random
David Schaich (he): results.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): this X.
David Schaich (he): The outcome of the experiment
David Schaich (he): is going to
David Schaich (he): behave as a random, variable.
David Schaich (he): adopting different possible
David Schaich (he): measurement outcomes with some probabilities which
David Schaich (he): well, we still need to define formally, but that is
David Schaich (he): the the target here. What does probability mean it mathematically?
David Schaich (he): Now, if we were to
David Schaich (he): measure
David Schaich (he): all of the States
David Schaich (he): in that set of all states. Capital Omega.
David Schaich (he): Then
David Schaich (he): this measurement will pick up all possible outcomes.
David Schaich (he): That's
David Schaich (he): the world can't take
David Schaich (he): discarding the the relevant information that we don't care about.
David Schaich (he): So we will say that
David Schaich (he): maps at all states
David Schaich (he): to a set of all outcomes for
David Schaich (he): the outcome space.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, we will call
David Schaich (he): it's the capital a
David Schaich (he): and the
hmm
David Schaich (he): just a finite set of outcomes, like if we flip the coin measure has your tails. Well, those are the possible outcomes. So a is just
David Schaich (he): heads or tails
David Schaich (he): it's possible for.
David Schaich (he): and help from space to be
David Schaich (he): countably infinite.
David Schaich (he): So it
David Schaich (he): i'll see you examples of all of these shortly.
David Schaich (he): You can also have
David Schaich (he): and outcome space. That is.
David Schaich (he): I'm. Countably
David Schaich (he): continuous.
David Schaich (he): So as a
David Schaich (he): sort of
David Schaich (he): it's an easy example of these definitions just to anchor them, something familiar.
David Schaich (he): We'll talk about, say, ruling
David Schaich (he): 6 sided down.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): so that is our experiment is role to die.
David Schaich (he): You will measure.
David Schaich (he): do you
David Schaich (he): number that comes out on top.
David Schaich (he): That is
David Schaich (he): the measurement that goes along with that experiment.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): what
David Schaich (he): I can ask you is the outcome space for rolling a dye and measuring
David Schaich (he): the number on top.
David Schaich (he): I mean that guy has 6 sides.
David Schaich (he): I'm. The standard
David Schaich (he): way.
David Schaich (he): Looks like some of you are already running down the answer.
David Schaich (he): So go ahead and and shout it out.
David Schaich (he): So the outcomes are.
David Schaich (he): I think you're actually going ahead and talking about the probability of each of those outcomes occurring
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): each outcome itself. We're actually looking for something simpler.
David Schaich (he): exactly.
David Schaich (he): and we will get to the corresponding probabilities
David Schaich (he): actually after the break. So that is the set of all outcomes. If we roll it to a dive, 6 side and dial, measure the number on top. Those numbers are one through 6,
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): if we measure every possible state of the world of the universe that we have after rolling a dive.
David Schaich (he): And those are the 6 outcomes that we can get.
David Schaich (he): You see it. So
David Schaich (he): saying, Omega.
David Schaich (he): so as opposed to just this very simple outcomes.
David Schaich (he): the State could also include
David Schaich (he): information about
David Schaich (he): the position
David Schaich (he): of the die after it's rolled.
David Schaich (he): It's
David Schaich (he): orientation.
David Schaich (he): not just which numbers on top, but which way the other numbers are pointing along the sides
David Schaich (he): couldn't. The State could care about the
David Schaich (he): which we wrote to die, the
David Schaich (he): temperature.
David Schaich (he): the room in which we will die.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): it's an in principle, any other aspect of the universe.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): we've now gotten within
David Schaich (he): 10 min out
David Schaich (he): halfway. Point 4
this
David Schaich (he): this 2 h block.
David Schaich (he): so it may be worthwhile to
David Schaich (he): take a
David Schaich (he): 10 min, break.
David Schaich (he): stretch the legs refresh.
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): dive in with some further examples
David Schaich (he): in about 10 min. There is something in the chat.
David Schaich (he): Augustine had
David Schaich (he): the same answers that I just put on. Here.
David Schaich (he): We will get to
David Schaich (he): more
non-trivial
David Schaich (he): examples of statistical physics. This is to
David Schaich (he): anchor
David Schaich (he): what we are defining in systems that we are familiar with. So
David Schaich (he): pause that
David Schaich (he): recording
David Schaich (he): for zoom
David Schaich (he): that recording and let's do
David Schaich (he): similarly simple examples to
David Schaich (he): reinforce the
David Schaich (he): the definition of
David Schaich (he): experiments and states and the outcome space. So.
David Schaich (he): for
David Schaich (he): this example, our experiments can be flipping in coin
David Schaich (he): to make this more interesting
David Schaich (he): 4 times.
David Schaich (he): and rather than considering that 4 different experiments.
David Schaich (he): just consider that
David Schaich (he): single experiments.
David Schaich (he): you know, flicking back 24 times.
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): measuring whether it comes up
David Schaich (he): heads
David Schaich (he): or tails.
David Schaich (he): or into those 4 times.
David Schaich (he): And then
David Schaich (he): what sort of outcomes are going to be
David Schaich (he): in the overall.
David Schaich (he): set up all outcomes or out from space. A. For this experiments with
David Schaich (he): this measurement.
David Schaich (he): like a few of you are running down the answer
David Schaich (he): Once you just shout out, not the entire outcome space, but just one outcome that will be in that set.
David Schaich (he): So again I think you're getting to.
David Schaich (he): So if we flip a coin once, we can then measure heads or tails.
David Schaich (he): Here's our experiment is not just doing it once, but for coin flips.
David Schaich (he): and then measuring has their meals after each of those 4.
David Schaich (he): So an outcome of
David Schaich (he): those 4 coin flips with that measurements
David Schaich (he): could be just getting heads
David Schaich (he): every time. So for sure, and
David Schaich (he): it's right that.
David Schaich (he): or heads in a row.
David Schaich (he): Another outcome would be
David Schaich (he): the first 3 being heads.
David Schaich (he): the last one tails.
This
David Schaich (he): it seems, from having
David Schaich (he): 3 heads, third, flip being the tails.
David Schaich (he): And then
David Schaich (he): there are
David Schaich (he): more possibilities
David Schaich (he): in that overall set.
David Schaich (he): Maybe I can ask you now that we've
David Schaich (he): seen
David Schaich (he): what sorts of outcomes are in the outcome space?
David Schaich (he): What is the
David Schaich (he): total number of
David Schaich (he): outcomes that there are here? So the number of elements for the size of the outcome Space a. I'll just represent
David Schaich (he): as that
David Schaich (he): half sign, a
David Schaich (he): 3 representative outcomes.
David Schaich (he): There are more that
David Schaich (he): hopefully you can
David Schaich (he): extrapolate from what we have.
David Schaich (he): How many are there
David Schaich (he): in total?
David Schaich (he): There will be? There's
David Schaich (he): 4 coin flips, each of which have 2 possible outcomes. They're all independent of each other, one after the next
David Schaich (he): into the power for
David Schaich (he): 16.
David Schaich (he): One of the
David Schaich (he): things you learn if you do a lot of computer programming.
David Schaich (he): all the powers of 2,
David Schaich (he): maybe for a more realistic example just to
David Schaich (he): book apps.
David Schaich (he): How these definitions map onto.
David Schaich (he): you know, real physical statistical systems that we still will be talking about
David Schaich (he): later in the module.
David Schaich (he): See, I've got those number worth of Argon Adams
David Schaich (he): in a container.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): that container has
David Schaich (he): a solid box.
David Schaich (he): I'll save it as
David Schaich (he): some
David Schaich (he): 10 of the power. 23.
David Schaich (he): There are 2
David Schaich (he): control, all in the power of
David Schaich (he): quite a few in that container.
David Schaich (he): and the state of
David Schaich (he): this is so. The experiment that we have
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): just observe it.
David Schaich (he): All of these are done atoms in that container.
David Schaich (he): the state
David Schaich (he): of the world that we can get out of that
David Schaich (he): information like
the
David Schaich (he): positions
David Schaich (he): of every single one of those atoms.
David Schaich (he): So, for example.
you
David Schaich (he): 3, that I've drawn there after all the particular points we can enumerate
David Schaich (he): the positions for all of those atoms
David Schaich (he): these that are going to deed
David Schaich (he): bouncing around
David Schaich (he): some
David Schaich (he): that we can also
David Schaich (he): include
David Schaich (he): in the States so
David Schaich (he): 10 to 23 velocities to go along with those 10 to the 24 positions.
David Schaich (he): You could also specify. See the electronic states
David Schaich (he): on each of those 10 to the 23 atoms, or any of them in excited states
David Schaich (he): or
David Schaich (he): windows. Oh, these events have say orientations their spins.
David Schaich (he): You can specify all of those.
David Schaich (he): Maybe I can ask you.
David Schaich (he): based on this
David Schaich (he): state. With some it's huge amount of information.
David Schaich (he): What are some things that it might be interesting
David Schaich (he): to measure?
David Schaich (he): That's a great one.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): and the period. So like that.
David Schaich (he): yeah, temperature pressure is
David Schaich (he): so called through a dynamic observable, it will be
David Schaich (he): doing a lot with.
David Schaich (he): and also
David Schaich (he): consider more generally.
David Schaich (he): energy with that, so
David Schaich (he): keep capacity.
David Schaich (he): We have yet to define what saw as a so a forecast.
David Schaich (he): and also the dynamical quantities like if there are any
David Schaich (he): prince
David Schaich (he): in the flow of atoms within this container. Maybe they're going around in a circle at a whirlpool. We can measure that.
David Schaich (he): But all of these are very large scale quantities, single numbers, or a handful of numbers compared to the end of the power. 23 pieces of data
David Schaich (he): stand as a whole.
David Schaich (he): So that is
David Schaich (he): hopefully driving home the contrast between the state of the universe with its huge amount of information.
David Schaich (he): and it
do you
David Schaich (he): measurements that give us outcomes
David Schaich (he): that we can
David Schaich (he): analyze
David Schaich (he): a more solid mathematical footing.
David Schaich (he): No.
David Schaich (he): moving on with just a few more definitions.
David Schaich (he): You can actually
David Schaich (he): generalize the concept of measurements
David Schaich (he): to
David Schaich (he): introduce a
David Schaich (he): unique label
David Schaich (he): for each State.
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): this is useful mathematically. If you want to
David Schaich (he): refer to a State rather than
David Schaich (he): describing all of the
David Schaich (he): information that it has, we can just refer to a unique
David Schaich (he): number
David Schaich (he): unique label that we assign to that particular collection of information.
David Schaich (he): And this is
David Schaich (he): a bit more
David Schaich (he): general Van.
David Schaich (he): The
David Schaich (he): concept of a measurements.
David Schaich (he): because those measurements are
David Schaich (he): in general not going to be
David Schaich (he): me
David Schaich (he): so. X
David Schaich (he): of Omega is likely to be the same for the large number of different states. Think of all the ways we could flip the coin, and it comes up heads regardless of when we flip it, how high we flip it, or where it lands. All of those produce
David Schaich (he): that same measurement. And
David Schaich (he): typically
David Schaich (he): we're going to measure
David Schaich (he): what we care about.
Well.
David Schaich (he): you put that
David Schaich (he): we have to in order for you to care about
David Schaich (he): what we measure.
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): means
David Schaich (he): carrying about that outcome space instead of all possible outcomes, like
David Schaich (he): 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 for rolling a die.
David Schaich (he): heads or tails for flipping a coin
David Schaich (he): rather than
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): much larger
David Schaich (he): set of all States Omega.
David Schaich (he): So, focusing on those outcomes.
David Schaich (he): It can be fine
David Schaich (he): and events
David Schaich (he): to be
David Schaich (he): any subset
David Schaich (he): of that outcome space. Okay.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): it's getting back to that example of the
you had.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, from space, a
David Schaich (he): being the
David Schaich (he): 6 possible size
David Schaich (he): that could come
David Schaich (he): up on top when we measure that
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): in events
David Schaich (he): it could be
David Schaich (he): getting the 6 out of that outcome space, or just as well
David Schaich (he): giving any other number
David Schaich (he): apart from 6.
David Schaich (he): So all those 5 possibilities, if you get any of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
David Schaich (he): We can treat that as a single event
David Schaich (he): for the last one being another one being
David Schaich (he): 0, one
David Schaich (he): an even number
David Schaich (he): 2, 4, or 6.
David Schaich (he): All 3 of those are legitimate offense. They're each subset
David Schaich (he): of the
David Schaich (he): set of all possible outcomes.
David Schaich (he): and it is these events to which we are going to assign probabilities.
and
David Schaich (he): it's the last step
David Schaich (he): for that, let me just say
David Schaich (he): similarly, have
David Schaich (he): an event space like we have an outcome space collecting outcomes. The event space will just
David Schaich (he): be
David Schaich (he): you set
David Schaich (he): of interest.
David Schaich (he): So it is the set of subsets of outcomes.
David Schaich (he): And it is this to which
David Schaich (he): you assign
David Schaich (he): probabilities.
David Schaich (he): Any questions about
David Schaich (he): all of those definitions. Now that we are
David Schaich (he): getting to the
David Schaich (he): so now we have it.
David Schaich (he): the probability
David Schaich (he): is a measure function.
David Schaich (he): I will call
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): which maps
David Schaich (he): the event space
David Schaich (he): on to
David Schaich (he): the real interval
David Schaich (he): between 0 and one.
David Schaich (he): So that
David Schaich (he): is a formal definition based on
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): other definitions that we have gone through. See, will reach this event. Space. That is a
David Schaich (he): an attempt for a capital curse of F. On my part, if you're wondering what the school are.
David Schaich (he): I don't need to draw
David Schaich (he): that letter too many times. So
David Schaich (he): what this means? It's giving us
David Schaich (he): a number between 0 and 100% 0 to one
David Schaich (he): for
David Schaich (he): each
David Schaich (he): events of interest.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): each of the subsets of the outcomes that we are going to
David Schaich (he): look at
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): saying that this is a measure function means, it has to satisfy 2 requirements
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): hopefully, we'll make intuitive sense.
David Schaich (he): If we look at the
David Schaich (he): probability of
David Schaich (he): multiple, usually exclusive
David Schaich (he): events. In that event Space
David Schaich (he): X and Y and Z.
Yes.
David Schaich (he): no.
David Schaich (he): x and Y. Z. At all
David Schaich (he): usually
David Schaich (he): exclusive.
David Schaich (he): Then that
David Schaich (he): overall probability, it must be the sum of the probability of X occurring. That is a number between 0 and one.
David Schaich (he): What's the probability of?
David Schaich (he): Why, on its own.
David Schaich (he): plus the
David Schaich (he): well, more generally
David Schaich (he): comfortable
David Schaich (he): of events in the space.
David Schaich (he): the probability of that union must be the sum of probabilities of
David Schaich (he): the individual events being considered.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): you, we will have examples of this, which is to
David Schaich (he): state one right now, if we look at the probability of rolling a 2 or 3 or 4 from that D,
David Schaich (he): we will get the probability of rolling a 2, plus the probability of rolling a 4.
David Schaich (he): What's the problem with what's your building like? I said it 3
David Schaich (he): hopefully.
David Schaich (he): intuitively obvious. Shout out. If not.
David Schaich (he): and there is a second requirement for this probability to be a measure function
David Schaich (he): that if we
David Schaich (he): set the
David Schaich (he): event space.
David Schaich (he): yeah, to be equal
David Schaich (he): to the outcome set itself.
David Schaich (he): So we are looking at the set
David Schaich (he): of all outcomes, each of which is mutually exclusive by construction.
David Schaich (he): This has to be equal to one for a 100%.
David Schaich (he): And that is just saying that the
David Schaich (he): experiments
David Schaich (he): and measurement we do, These 2
David Schaich (he): have someone
David Schaich (he): measurable outcome.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): it's also so
David Schaich (he): the probability of something happening used to be a 100%.
David Schaich (he): And the
David Schaich (he): in essence this is a
David Schaich (he): restriction on the experiments and measurements that we consider if we do an experiment that doesn't produce a visual outcome.
David Schaich (he): You might as well not have that it at all. It doesn't filter through to that event space and through the probabilities.
David Schaich (he): So when we talk about
David Schaich (he): flipping a coin, we will talk only about the probabilities of it landing heads or tails, and not the probability that
David Schaich (he): a seagull through spy, and
David Schaich (he): it's it's in midair.
David Schaich (he): That's going to be an experiment that we discard and Don't include
David Schaich (he): in the set of outcomes.
David Schaich (he): or in
David Schaich (he): the probability space.
David Schaich (he): I'm. Shy
David Schaich (he): almost not to define. If we
David Schaich (he): put together
David Schaich (he): everything we defined
David Schaich (he): so far.
David Schaich (he): What we end up with is
David Schaich (he): the concept of
David Schaich (he): the probability space.
David Schaich (he): hey?
David Schaich (he): And P.
David Schaich (he): So this is
David Schaich (he): bringing together
David Schaich (he): all of the outcomes
David Schaich (he): of the experiments and measurement that we do.
David Schaich (he): All of the events, the possible subsets of those outcomes that we're interested in, each of which has
David Schaich (he): its own probability.
David Schaich (he): This probability. Space
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): the basic
David Schaich (he): object that we'll be working with in the form of what are called statistical ensembles.
David Schaich (he): We'll revisit that more formally once we get to it.
David Schaich (he): But a statistical ensemble is going to be like that example of argon atoms in a container.
David Schaich (he): it will be the probability of space that corresponds to some collection of particles
David Schaich (he): that involves in time. That's the experiment
David Schaich (he): that we observed
David Schaich (he): and measure
David Schaich (he): the possible States. It has
David Schaich (he): with corresponding probabilities
David Schaich (he): that forms to you
David Schaich (he): basis of
David Schaich (he): the analysis that we will do
David Schaich (he): first, that we still need to
David Schaich (he): get to that wall of large numbers
David Schaich (he): and central limit theorem. At least
David Schaich (he): we stay in them
and
let's
David Schaich (he): continue toward that, just by
David Schaich (he): talking through another example for the remaining definitions that we have
David Schaich (he): all through.
David Schaich (he): Let's suppose we have
David Schaich (he): some experiment that produces a
David Schaich (he): how many nights
David Schaich (he): a set of possible events. So the event space.
David Schaich (he): It's just going to be omega one.
David Schaich (he): some state omega 2,
David Schaich (he): and then up to
David Schaich (he): Omega sub capital n total number of
David Schaich (he): states that we have is just a capital N,
David Schaich (he): and then we
David Schaich (he): measure
David Schaich (he): something of interest on each of those States.
David Schaich (he): which is, we
David Schaich (he): says, this can't give
David Schaich (he): the same
David Schaich (he): outcome
David Schaich (he): for
David Schaich (he): different or distinct
David Schaich (he): states.
David Schaich (he): Mathematically
David Schaich (he): excellent.
David Schaich (he): We'll make this up all you
David Schaich (he): can be equal to X of Omega subject.
David Schaich (he): even when
our distinct states.
David Schaich (he): That's the example. We talked through
David Schaich (he): slipping a coin and getting heads even when the coin flip was at a different time of different force.
David Schaich (he): So that means that the
David Schaich (he): outcome space
David Schaich (he): it's going to be
David Schaich (he): smaller than the overall
David Schaich (he): that space, this this set of possible states.
David Schaich (he): So we will have, say X. One you can use as a shorthand for some measurement on one of these states, Omega, not necessarily
David Schaich (he): like a one or an x 2 for distinct
David Schaich (he): measurement outcomes on a different set of states
David Schaich (he): all the way up to an X to a lower case, and
David Schaich (he): where number of elements in a
David Schaich (he): it's the slower case, and
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): can be no larger than the number of States that we started off with it.
We've
David Schaich (he): put in here for you
David Schaich (he): construction that all of these measurements are to stand
David Schaich (he): so if we
David Schaich (he): choose the
David Schaich (he): that space of interest to be
David Schaich (he): that's outcome. Space
David Schaich (he): have equals day. Which just means that
David Schaich (he): what events will be interested in when the outcome is x one
David Schaich (he): another events, I mean the next 2.
David Schaich (he): So on.
David Schaich (he): for all of the remaining individual outcomes, looking at the one by one.
David Schaich (he): These are all
David Schaich (he): usually exclusive events by construction.
David Schaich (he): So the
David Schaich (he): probability, and
David Schaich (he): oh.
David Schaich (he): x I.
David Schaich (he): For Xj.
David Schaich (he): Is
David Schaich (he): the some of the
David Schaich (he): to individual probabilities of those 2 outcomes
David Schaich (he): we can call
David Schaich (he): Probability P. All in
David Schaich (he): and Pj.
David Schaich (he): That assumes I is not equal to J.
David Schaich (he): And the
David Schaich (he): probability of the outcome space as a whole.
David Schaich (he): which is.
David Schaich (he): how do you
David Schaich (he): X, one.
David Schaich (he): 4, x, 2,
David Schaich (he): or any of the other outcomes
David Schaich (he): up to Xn
David Schaich (he): that? It's the sum
David Schaich (he): I going from one to the
David Schaich (he): all of each of those
David Schaich (he): probabilities
David Schaich (he): that we've defined for the individual outcomes, and we know that this
David Schaich (he): as they add up to one. That's the requirement on the probability as a measure function.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): hey you.
David Schaich (he): it's yeah
David Schaich (he): switch to
David Schaich (he): a new page.
David Schaich (he): Make sure there's space.
David Schaich (he): Continue that example by it
David Schaich (he): special specifying.
David Schaich (he): Hey, you
David Schaich (he): there die again the 6 sides you've written down
David Schaich (he): the outcome space
David Schaich (he): before
David Schaich (he): it was just
David Schaich (he): the number that comes out on top.
David Schaich (he): And what we mean by fair
David Schaich (he): is that
David Schaich (he): the corresponding
David Schaich (he): probabilities for each of those 6 outcomes
David Schaich (he): are all going to be
David Schaich (he): you cool
David Schaich (he): Some probabilities
David Schaich (he): piece of one through piece of 6, or on the quote and just call that
David Schaich (he): P.
David Schaich (he): So.
David Schaich (he): acting with this probability measure function
David Schaich (he): on that.
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): outcome space for this role of the dial.
David Schaich (he): How was this that
David Schaich (he): some
David Schaich (he): I one to 6?
David Schaich (he): Oh.
David Schaich (he): it Constant P.
David Schaich (he): It's just
David Schaich (he): e plus p plus p plus p. 6 times
David Schaich (he): that has to be equal to one.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): we finally got into where some of you were already.
David Schaich (he): that the probability for each outcome, the role of the fair die is 1 6.
David Schaich (he): We can do
David Schaich (he): that same for
David Schaich (he): the same exercise, for that
David Schaich (he): other example of
David Schaich (he): for
David Schaich (he): flips of the coin that we will now assume, we will now declare, is also fair.
David Schaich (he): There says that we have the equal probability of getting either the 2 outcomes for each flip, heads or tails.
David Schaich (he): There's no bias in one direction or the other.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): we have that
David Schaich (he): when we flip it 4 times we get 16 possible outcomes, each of which has
David Schaich (he): equal probability. 2,
David Schaich (he): all of the others.
David Schaich (he): the PP. 16, and we'll call what you know it's again.
David Schaich (he): and by
David Schaich (he): acting on.
David Schaich (he): by considering the probability of an event space
David Schaich (he): that is equal to the outcome space. Each of those 16 possible outcomes
David Schaich (he): you find
David Schaich (he): to you
David Schaich (he): some over 16 equal probabilities.
David Schaich (he): which is 16 times
David Schaich (he): the unusual probability. It must be one.
David Schaich (he): Or, in other words.
David Schaich (he): that's
David Schaich (he): he is one over 16 for each of those 16 possible outcomes of flipping a Bitcoin
David Schaich (he): 4 times.
David Schaich (he): And now that we've determined the probabilities of
David Schaich (he): each other.
David Schaich (he): these individual events, so identifying an events as
David Schaich (he): hey
David Schaich (he): elements in the outcome space.
David Schaich (he): we can think about different outcome spaces.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): so from space is a the event space. You'll think about a different event space
David Schaich (he): before I have 2 different events, 2 different subsets of the outcome space.
David Schaich (he): One of the subsets will be the outcomes where
David Schaich (he): number of heads
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the number of tails are equal.
David Schaich (he): and another events can be
David Schaich (he): the outcome where
David Schaich (he): number of heads
David Schaich (he): and the number of tales is
David Schaich (he): different.
David Schaich (he): and we can now
David Schaich (he): based on the
David Schaich (he): other
David Schaich (he): requirement. For that your function to determine the probabilities of these 2 events.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): there are
well
David Schaich (he): how many different outcomes are there that's fall into this
David Schaich (he): first subset, where a number of heads and tails
David Schaich (he): are equal.
David Schaich (he): What possible
David Schaich (he): outcome of this form is to
David Schaich (he): have 2 heads at first, and then 2 tails. Thereafter
David Schaich (he): what the opposite could happen. 2 tails and 2 heads.
David Schaich (he): and i'll just yeah go ahead and
David Schaich (he): like the possible permutations
David Schaich (he): of that
David Schaich (he): outcome, the 2 heads into tails
David Schaich (he): outcomes.
David Schaich (he): So those are 6 events that have an equal number of 2 heads and 2 tails.
David Schaich (he): It's a bit of thought hopefully. You will not object when I say that there are no other events from from the a point 4 times that have an equal number, they always have to be
David Schaich (he): 2 and 2;
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): because the probability of
David Schaich (he): this
David Schaich (he): countable union of different outcomes.
David Schaich (he): It's just the probability of
David Schaich (he): but the sum of the probability of each individual outcome
David Schaich (he): Probability of
David Schaich (he): this first events in the event, space getting an equal number of Hasn't handles.
David Schaich (he): He is
David Schaich (he): 6
David Schaich (he): outcomes, each of which has
David Schaich (he): that equal probability of one sixteenth, which is known as 3 days to its friends.
David Schaich (he): Similar bit of
David Schaich (he): consideration
David Schaich (he): we can think about
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): other events.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, Convince yourselves if you have not done so already at
David Schaich (he): every single event from flipping this point 4 times that does not give 2 heads and 2 tails has to give a different number
David Schaich (he): of heads. And
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): you are 10 of those.
plus the
David Schaich (he): 6 out of 16 into those 10
David Schaich (he): as a one over 16 probability with a fair coin. What!
David Schaich (he): 5 days!
David Schaich (he): So These are the probabilities that map the events in the event space onto
David Schaich (he): that's real interval from 0 to one.
David Schaich (he): What we can do now is
David Schaich (he): introduce a
David Schaich (he): more interesting example.
David Schaich (he): Sh! I
David Schaich (he): have put somewhere
David Schaich (he): absolutely.
David Schaich (he): I don't think of their page there.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): this is
David Schaich (he): a European roulette wheel that is a gambling game
David Schaich (he): which i'm not going to advocate
David Schaich (he): gambling. But
David Schaich (he): it is
David Schaich (he): something that gives us a lot of intricate probability to think about, especially if you
David Schaich (he): find yourself by some strange coin in the Casino, where we let this ongoing.
David Schaich (he): The idea is.
David Schaich (he): this is a wheel that spins a ball. It's thrown into that wheel to spin around in the opposite direction, and as it slows it will land in one of these
David Schaich (he): 37
David Schaich (he): pockets
David Schaich (he): let's see space I have on the screen here.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): good
David Schaich (he): the gambling works by placing a that beforehand on either which
David Schaich (he): pockets the ball will end up in for which some of these pockets you will end up in.
David Schaich (he): We can see you mentioned that 18
David Schaich (he): of these
David Schaich (he): pockets are.
David Schaich (he): You can also bet.
David Schaich (he): not the all ending up in any of those. There are 18 that are black.
David Schaich (he): and there is
David Schaich (he): the one green pocket
David Schaich (he): number 0.
David Schaich (he): There.
David Schaich (he): We need to zoom out
David Schaich (he): slightly to have
David Schaich (he): that figure on the screen and some blank space underneath it. So the outcome sets
David Schaich (he): are they spin
David Schaich (he): of the roulette wheel
David Schaich (he): measurements
David Schaich (he): the pocket that the ball falls into
David Schaich (he): gives us
David Schaich (he): 37
David Schaich (he): possibilities that we can
David Schaich (he): legal
David Schaich (he): 0, 1, 2 up to 36
David Schaich (he): specifying which of these 37 pockets at the
David Schaich (he): ball
David Schaich (he): falls into. So we
David Schaich (he): should remember gambling with that
David Schaich (he): we are dealing with
David Schaich (he): the scare roulette wheel.
David Schaich (he): No, the same
David Schaich (he): sorts of derivations that we did for the simpler examples.
David Schaich (he): How? What's that for you?
David Schaich (he): Some of I 0 to 36
David Schaich (he): of equal probabilities for each of these 37 pockets.
David Schaich (he): As up to that 100% probability.
David Schaich (he): One of the words.
David Schaich (he): there is a conference
David Schaich (he): probability one over 37
David Schaich (he): for each measurement outcome. The ball ended up in each of these
David Schaich (he): 37 pockets.
David Schaich (he): We can then consider the
David Schaich (he): sort of event space that might be relevant to
David Schaich (he): a gambling game being played with this roulette wheel
David Schaich (he): that could be placed on
David Schaich (he): whether the
David Schaich (he): or the black pocket for that one
David Schaich (he): me in pocket.
David Schaich (he): We can check that. These
David Schaich (he): events are all mutually
David Schaich (he): exclusive.
David Schaich (he): In that event, Space?
David Schaich (he): Yeah, pretty easily confused.
David Schaich (he): the corresponding probabilities again assuming
David Schaich (he): at the
David Schaich (he): wheel is fair. There are.
David Schaich (he): she said, 18
David Schaich (he): red pockets.
David Schaich (he): each of which has
David Schaich (he): an equal probability, one over 37,
David Schaich (he): so that's probability of ending up.
David Schaich (he): and that first
David Schaich (he): subsets of the outcomes in our space.
Yes.
David Schaich (he): slightly under a half.
David Schaich (he): It is actually
David Schaich (he): same probability
David Schaich (he): it's ending up
David Schaich (he): in a black pocket. It's because there are equal number of red of black pockets.
David Schaich (he): and then the green pockets.
David Schaich (he): the on option out
David Schaich (he): 3 meeting
David Schaich (he): one over 37
David Schaich (he): probability.
David Schaich (he): and in roulette.
David Schaich (he): maybe a correspondingly higher reward.
David Schaich (he): So we will actually come back to this example.
David Schaich (he): not today, but
David Schaich (he): possibly tomorrow.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): do some computations of
David Schaich (he): how
David Schaich (he): they g the game. Can you expect it to proceed? Based on these
David Schaich (he): probabilities.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): popping back to page we were on before, and just saying
David Schaich (he): one final thing about
David Schaich (he): these probabilities themselves. Now that we've defined the probability as
David Schaich (he): a measure function.
David Schaich (he): What we've been doing in these examples
David Schaich (he): my assigned
David Schaich (he): probabilities.
David Schaich (he): 2 events in the United States I can zoom back in.
David Schaich (he): but I don't have to keep that
David Schaich (he): the picture visible.
David Schaich (he): This we can.
David Schaich (he): I believe.
David Schaich (he): define or just call
David Schaich (he): the procedure of modeling.
David Schaich (he): So we are
David Schaich (he): modeling the behavior
David Schaich (he): of
David Schaich (he): these simple systems.
David Schaich (he): and in the cases that we've seen.
David Schaich (he): this assignment of probabilities has been
David Schaich (he): fixed by the symmetries of the system.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): by assuming that the diver rolling is fair, we had say, a symmetry between each of the 6 size
David Schaich (he): of that fair die.
David Schaich (he): which, from the definition of the measure function
David Schaich (he): fixed to the probabilities of getting each of those outcomes.
David Schaich (he): Now, if we don't know whether the dialer ruling is there?
David Schaich (he): Or if we have a more complicated system, or we don't just have
David Schaich (he): 6 outcomes for the symmetry between them.
David Schaich (he): We can do this modeling, or sign these probabilities
David Schaich (he): more generally
David Schaich (he): with what's called
David Schaich (he): the approach.
David Schaich (he): So we don't need to
David Schaich (he): so many symmetries, or you, or the fairness of any die.
David Schaich (he): What we do is take that
David Schaich (he): experiments.
David Schaich (he): You repeat
David Schaich (he): many times
David Schaich (he): any time.
David Schaich (he): measure or
David Schaich (he): monitor that random variable.
David Schaich (he): the outcome that we get.
David Schaich (he): And then
David Schaich (he): from those outcomes.
David Schaich (he): okay.
David Schaich (he): and for the probabilities
David Schaich (he): of each outcome
David Schaich (he): in the outcome space for each events in the event space.
David Schaich (he): thanks to what it's called the
David Schaich (he): log of large numbers, so we rely on.
David Schaich (he): But first for our next target for
David Schaich (he): like probability foundation.
David Schaich (he): that's a will not go to unless there are questions about
David Schaich (he): what we've done so far.
David Schaich (he): What
David Schaich (he): seeing any?
David Schaich (he): Let's get on to that
David Schaich (he): all of large numbers, and
David Schaich (he): start off with
David Schaich (he): it's restating
David Schaich (he): in particular context. So getting back to
David Schaich (he): and in that space which is a finite outcome, set that X one
David Schaich (he): x, 2
David Schaich (he): up to
David Schaich (he): X, and
David Schaich (he): that was
David Schaich (he): a previous generic example.
David Schaich (he): The
David Schaich (he): probability, yeah
David Schaich (he): of
David Schaich (he): each outcome in
David Schaich (he): Yeah, from space. Xi. We can call
David Schaich (he): piece of I
David Schaich (he): number between
David Schaich (he): 0 and one inclusive.
David Schaich (he): with the sum over all.
David Schaich (he): some overall
David Schaich (he): and P. Sub. I. Adding up to 100%,
David Schaich (he): you privately.
David Schaich (he): You can express this
David Schaich (he): as a sum over all
David Schaich (he): outcomes in
David Schaich (he): the outcome space, so i'll come back and the outcome space a.
David Schaich (he): The probability of that outcome
David Schaich (he): has to add up to one again, because
David Schaich (he): we're sending over an event space which is all of the outcomes in that outcome stays, say.
David Schaich (he): assuming the countable union with a finite number of outcomes. So this will generalize to uncountable
outcome spaces as well.
David Schaich (he): Then based on
David Schaich (he): the setting
David Schaich (he): we can or based on this probability space, I should say, probabilities p
David Schaich (he): the events space at
David Schaich (he): a subset of the outcome space. A.
David Schaich (he): We can define. What is that? I suspect you
David Schaich (he): seen before
David Schaich (he): what the mean value of the outcome space
David Schaich (he): we'll call You
David Schaich (he): Also write it as
David Schaich (he): X. In these angle brackets
David Schaich (he): so an expected or expectation value
David Schaich (he): all that the me is.
David Schaich (he): It's the way that some
David Schaich (he): over events
David Schaich (he): in that outcome space
David Schaich (he): of the events itself
David Schaich (he): multiply by its probability.
David Schaich (he): and hopefully that is
David Schaich (he): fairly familiar and just being recast in the language that we have
David Schaich (he): introduced so far today.
David Schaich (he): There is a similar concept of the variance.
David Schaich (he): Again, a property of the probability space
David Schaich (he): that's
David Schaich (he): we'll call
David Schaich (he): sigma squared. So my 4 thoughts
David Schaich (he): what this variance is
David Schaich (he): is essentially a measure how much should be
David Schaich (he): outcome to the outcome space area around that mean
David Schaich (he): so an expectation value
David Schaich (he): of the outcomes
David Schaich (he): compared to the meeting
David Schaich (he): square.
David Schaich (he): the chrome, maybe some
David Schaich (he): over all of the outcomes.
David Schaich (he): Oh.
David Schaich (he): this these fluctuations of X around the mean, squared and weighted
David Schaich (he): by the probability of each outcome. X.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): more generally
David Schaich (he): you can
David Schaich (he): to find the expected value of expectation. Value is probably what I will see if I haven't.
I can just
David Schaich (he): written this here.
David Schaich (he): Any function
David Schaich (he): of
David Schaich (he): the outcomes
David Schaich (he): has an expectation value given by these angle brackets.
David Schaich (he): It's the way that it's
David Schaich (he): over outcomes in the outcome space
David Schaich (he): F. Of X.
David Schaich (he): Weighted by the corresponding probability
David Schaich (he): of X,
David Schaich (he): which is
David Schaich (he): it's golf
David Schaich (he): we can see. This is a linear operation
David Schaich (he): so that you
David Schaich (he): expectation. Value of the sum of 2 functions is the sum of the expectation values of those individual functions.
and
David Schaich (he): analogously, when functions are weighted by
David Schaich (he): any constant factor that will be useful when we look. I think next time, given the time
David Schaich (he): you will introduce the
David Schaich (he): standard deviation
David Schaich (he): of the probability space.
David Schaich (he): this will be the same model
David Schaich (he): square root of the variance. Sigma squared.
David Schaich (he): We will be able to express this in terms of expectation values, and then start
David Schaich (he): working with it.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the context of a law of large numbers which will be
David Schaich (he): our topic for next time. So we've seen today our first
David Schaich (he): motivation for
David Schaich (he): going through these formal definitions and considerations of statistical physics.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): lots of Nobel prizes that have been awarded.
David Schaich (he): We talked about the 1926, 2,006 and 2,021 Nobel Prize for working statistical physics. Many more are you to come?
David Schaich (he): We check out the logistics.
David Schaich (he): Let me know if there's any concerns about that. And now we've gone through
David Schaich (he): It's sort of what I find the most important with the physicists, which is the formal definitions of things like
David Schaich (he): experiments, states, measurements, outcomes, outcome spaces of that spaces and probability spaces.
David Schaich (he): And now we're getting to the statement of the whole course. Numbers based on
David Schaich (he): those definitions in those concepts. That's where we'll pick up tomorrow afternoon. Not here, but next door.
David Schaich (he): Any final questions before you wrap up for this morning.
David Schaich (he): I hope to see you again tomorrow.
David Schaich (he): That one
David Schaich (he): question of the chat. Thanks.
David Schaich (he): thanks for joining remotely
David Schaich (he): what it's done.
David Schaich (he): I'm sorry if I just pronounce your name.
David Schaich (he): Have a recording
David Schaich (he): sure.